---
layout: post
title: "AGU fall meeting: Part 3 - Abstract similarities"
published: true
---

American Geophysical  Union (AGU)  meeting is a  geoscience conference
hold  each year  around Christmas  in San  Francisco. It  represents a
great opportunity for PhD students like  me to show off their work and
enjoy what  the west coast has  to offer. However, with  nearly 24 000
attendees,  AGU Fall  Meeting  is  also the  largest  Earth and  space
science meeting  in the world.  As such, it represents  an interesting
data set to dive into the geoscience academic world. 

In  this post,  I explore  different information  retrieval techniques
taken from  the field  of natural language  processing to  explore the
hidden patterns in the submitted abstract.

The objective is two fold:

- Identify  semantic-based   similarities  between   the  contribution
  proposed  at AGU  to  build  a recommandation  system  based on  the
  abstract content.
- Propose for each contributor a list of potential collaborators based
  on the authors of the papers proposed by our recommendantion system.

Different natural language processing tools are available in python to
achieve        this        goal         and        after        trying
[sklearn](http://scikit-learn.org/stable/),  I  decided to  settle  on
[gensim](https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/)  which has  partilarly fast
and  effective  implementations to  work  with  large dataset  (~20000
abstracts here).

The basic stage, which I'll detail in the following are

- Cleaning the data.
- Construct a valid embedding of the documents.
- Compute the similarities between the document within this embedding.


## Tokenizing and stemming


